- TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) is a connection oriented protocol which means that we keep track of how much data has been transmitted. The sender will transmit some data and the receiver has to acknowledge it. When we don’t receive the acknowledgment in time then the sender will re-transmit the data.
- TCP uses “windowing” which means that a sender will send one or more data segments and the receiver will acknowledge one or all segments. When we start a TCP connection, the hosts will use a receive buffer where we temporarily store data before the application can process it.
- When the receiver sends an acknowledgment, it will tell the sender how much data it can transmit before the receiver will send an acknowledgment. We call this the **window size**. Basically, the window size indicates the size of the receive buffer.
- Typically the TCP connection will start with a small window size and every time when there is a successful acknowledgement, the window size will increase.
- With TCP slow start, the window size will initially grow exponentially (window size doubles) but once a packet is dropped, the window size will be reduced to one segment. It will then grow exponentially again until the window size is half of what it was when the congestion occurred. At that moment, the window size will grow linearly instead of exponentially.
- When an interface gets congested, it’s possible that all your TCP connections will experience TCP slow start. Packets will be dropped and then all TCP connections will have a small window size. This is called **TCP global synchronization**.
- To prevent global synchronization we can use RED (Random Early Detection). this is a feature that drops “random” packets from TCP flows based on the number of packets in a queue and the TOS (Type of Service) marking of the packets. When packets are dropped before a queue is full, we can avoid the global synchronization.